---
layout: post
title:  "iphone"
---

Bit of a pace change here, I don't particularly care about consumer electronics
but mobile computers aka phones are an exception since for better or worse
they're inextricably tied up with much of my life.

After being a longtime user of Pixel devices (which pairly nicely with Google
Fi cell service), the screen on my Pixel 4a broke recently. At the same time I
went to Yosemite with some friends and noticed that the pictures they took with
their iPhones looked a lot better than the pictures I've taken with any Android
phones. I was always skeptical of iPhone's ostensibly restrictive user
experience (relative to Android), but being rather bored with technology and
not finding any really good Android phones on the market (where are the microsd
slots?) decided to pick up an iPhone. Apple has a decent 14 day return policy,
so I figured I'd try it out and if the device annoyed me I'd just return it and
get whatever the current number pixel is. In short, I've been pleasantly
surprised by iPhone and am keeping it. I bought the iPhone 13 Mini with 512gb
of storage.

My main hangups coming into iPhone numbered three:

*No filesystem access*

I'd vaguely heard that it is difficult to access iPhone's filesystem. This is
one of the things that kept me from seriously looking into iPhone in the past.
I know how computers work, I know consumer computers have a filesystem that has
files on it, one of the main things I do with computers is work with files on
the filesystem. I'm generally not interested in learning abstractions over the
filesystem and if I'm prevented from doing things I normally do with the
filesystem, like moving files around, that's a nonstarter for me.

Turns out this concern was misplaced. The iOS concept of the filesystem is more
complicated than the one on Android, but from a functional perspective I can
still accomplish the same tasks. I can mount various parts of the iPhone
filesystem on my Arch laptop via a FUSE module and get to the files I need to
get to. On iOS, apps apparently have their own private filesystems, which is
kind of a neat concept and makes perfect sense from an application sandboxing
perspective. These can also be mounted on Linux via FUSE. I can copy files to
and from application filesystems and I can copy to and from the directories iOS
exposes for use as mass storage.

By far the biggest filesystem-related task I do with phones is to sync my music
collection to the device. With the way I manage my music collection, I prefer
to do this with `rsync`, it's simple and clean and does what I need it to. On
Android I would mount the phone filesystem via `jmtpfs` and `rsync` my music to a
directory in the filesystem; on iOS I mount the application filesystem for my
music player application (VLC) using `ifuse` and do the same thing.

Android:
```
jmtpfs ~/mnt
```
Mounts the whole phone filesystem on `~/mnt`. Now I can copy my music to
`~/mnt/Music` with `rsync`.

iOS:
```
ifuse -o allow_other --documents org.videolan.vlc-ios ~/mnt
```
Mounts VLC's application filesystem on `~/mnt`. Now I can copy my music to
`~/mnt/Music` with `rsync`.

A little more regarding application filesystems. The first thing I noticed when
using iPhone was that when I wanted to save a picture from the browser to the
phone, I had to choose where I wanted it to end up. The two options iOS
presents in are `Files` and `Photos`. This is strange, conceptually I am saving
a file, so the distinction between these two things isn't clear. After I
figured out the application filesystem thing this makes a lot more sense;
choosing `Photos` saves the picture to the `Photos` application's filesystem,
saving it to `Files` saves it to the `Files` application's filesystem. This
seemed like a bizarre abstraction over the very simple concept of a filesystem
until I realized that this ties into how iOS does application sandboxing.

iOS doesn't work like Android where an app either has access to the filesystem
or it doesn't; on iOS you grant individual apps access to specific paths in the
filesystem. There also seems to be a concept of apps asking other apps for
permission to access parts of their app filesystems, although this may be the
same thing (not sure as I haven't done any iOS development). This is awesome
from a security perspective and is something I didn't know I needed until I
used it. For example, if I want to send a picture to a channel in Discord on
Android, I open the Discord file picker and all photos on my phone are visible
from within the application; i.e. Discord has unfettered access to the
filesystem. A malicious or buggy Discord could choose to send any picture it
wanted, there's no access controls preventing it from doing that. Contrast with
iOS; I open the Discord file picker, and by default I see no photos. Instead
there's iOS UX there that allows me to grant Discord access to *specific*
photos. Once I grant access, then Discord allows me to pick from the photos
I've granted it access to. This is a huge deal. This is absolutely how it
should be. Filesystem access should be heavily locked down and mediated by the
operating system on mobile devices. In retrospect Android is extremely
primitive in this regard.

It's difficult to explain in text without seeing how it works in practice, but
once I used it, I had a moment of "ah, I get it now" and was sold on it.

One other note on this; I'd heard people say "oh but iOS has the Files app now"
in response to concerns of restricted filesystem access. It does indeed have a
Files app, and this app is interesting. It's a surprisingly comprehensive file
management app. It allows you to access select application filesystems - it
seems to be limited to ones that apps choose to expose - and some other parts
of the filesystem, although the parts that are exposed are clearly curated by
iOS. There's obviously no view of the root filesystem. Functionally it feels
like porcelain over a bunch of bind mounts or a virtual filesystem being used
to present a clean, access controlled interface to stuff iOS has decided you
should see. To be honest, I rather like it. The Files app also has the
capability to mount remote shares, another pleasant surprise; I was able to add
my home Samba server easily and played around with copying music files from it
into the VLC app filesystem using just the Files app, which actually worked.

*No webm support*

I watch a lot of webms. For some reason - I really don't care about the
justification - Apple has decided webm is not an ordained format and refuses to
implement a system codec for it.

Yeah, this one kind of sucks. Webms just don't load or present as file
downloads instead of embedded playback in places where they'd normally embed as
videos on Android. Installing VLC and opening the file in VLC works well enough
to live with it, but still, this is stupid and for a company that really cares
about user experience, they should just implement webms. I don't care if
there's a royalty situation or a nonfree codec situation or whatever the issue
is. Apple is the world's most valuable company, they can afford to pay
royalties so that I can play webms on my $1000+ mobile computer that I bought
from them. No excuses.

*"Lock-in"*

Vague concerns about being locked into the Apple ecosystem, forced to use only
apps approved by Apple, integration with iCloud, etc...

This one is also valid. Lack of first class support for sideloading is a
legitimate gripe here. Functionally this means I can't install Newpipe to watch
YouTube without ads. I don't know who the hell watches YouTube ads, but I'm not
about to spend hours of my life watching that trash. My time is more valuable
than that.

Using YouTube frontends like Invidious in the browser works, but it's not
really a great experience. Notably, it is still better than the YouTube app
with ads, but it's worse than Newpipe where I had my own curated playlists and
subscriptions managed entirely through the app (not tied to my Google account).

I'm told that the data shows that people who buy iPhone are much more willing
to pay money to solve problems than other people are. I imagine most people
solve this problem by paying for YouTube Pro or YouTube Red or whatever the
premium YouTube version is that doesn't show you ads. I may end up there but
not today. As a matter of principle I refuse.

I also think it's complete bullshit that I can't sideload apps on my $1000+
computer. I paid for it, it's mine, let me run my code on it. But this horse
has been beat to death so many times, and Apple definitely knows that people
will still use iPhone, and they're right about that. I'm still using iPhone.

---

## Positives

So, there are legitimate grips with iPhone. But goodness gracious, the positives.

1) UX

Everyone knows this one. iPhone is famous for the UI being buttery smooth at
all times. This is real. As much as I wish I didn't, I use my phone probably a
couple hours a day. Having nearly every interaction with the device be pretty
much glitch/hang-free is such a tangible upgrade over Android.

Minor things like picture-in-picture, context menus, the screenshot editor etc.
all work together for an experience that is far more consistent and far more
pleasant than Android. For a device that runs large swaths of my life, it's a
significant upgrade.

2) Pictures

It is just a fact that the iPhone takes amazing pictures. Through whatever
combination of camera and software, pictures on the iPhone turn out
consistently better than any picture I ever took with any Android flagship -
and I have owned a lot, from the Nexus 5 through the Pixel 4a. Having a wide
angle camera is also awesome, I use that thing all the time.

3) Security

I said most of what I wanted to say in the filesystem section, but yeah. The
iOS security model is clearly much more mature than that of Android. I attend
certain conferences and at those conferences there's always a talk or two about
breaking iOS application sandboxing. No one gives talks like that for Android.
Draw your own conclusions there.

4) MagSafe

Wireless charging is dope, but MagSafe is the nicest system I've used out of
all of them. I really like the MagSafe charger for iPhone.

5) General build quality

Apple's build quality is legendary, iPhone is no exception. Hardware silent
mode switch is GOAT.

## Negatives

1) The media situation

Apple really, really, REALLY wants you to use iTunes. Even if I wanted to use
iTunes, I can't, because it doesn't run on my computer. Apple, if you want me
to use iTunes, you have to make it run on my computer.

The iPhone media library is weird. Apparently iOS has a concept of music,
videos and photos being some kind of special entities above and beyond regular
files. This kind of makes sense from a historical perspective; the iPhone was
originally launched as a 3-in-1 combo device, as Steve Jobs said, "A widescreen
iPod with touch controls, a revolutionary mobile phone, and an internet
communications device" or something like that. So the media situation on iPhone
is a relic of it being conceptualized as having an iPod inside of it, and you
use iTunes to manage iPods. I have fond memories from the early 2000's of
copying music to my iPod shuffle's mass storage using Windows XP and then the
songs just never playing on the iPod because I didn't rebuild the database
file...that's still a thing on iPhone, somehow. Android has this in the bag,
the way media is indexed and behaves on Android isn't perfect but it's better
than iPhone. Media is files. I should be able to copy the files to disk and
then the Music app should see them and play them, full stop. VLC is an
all-in-one alternative solution to the system media applications, but again, it
shouldn't be necessary. At the very least if Apple wants to lock users into
iTunes it needs to support iTunes on all major operating systems. And Linux is
a major operating system. I use Arch btw.

2) iCloud integration

Fuck off, I don't want your cloud service and it shouldn't be integrated into
my $,$$$ computer.

3) Lightning

This isn't a huge deal so far but I really wish it just had type c.

*Update 07/23/22*:

Turns out this is a huge deal. When I purchased this incredibly expensive
flagship smartphone which was released to market in September 2021, I assumed
that it would provide a physical interface capable of supporting at least USB
3.0. I did not check this. USB 3.0 was published in 2008. Virtually every
smartphone made in the past decade has had USB 3.0.

Not iPhone! The lightning connector offers, unbelievably, USB 2.0. The USB 2.0
spec was published in April 2000. It offers a maximum data rate of about 480
Mbps.

This is absolutely irredeemable dog shit. It is unbelievable that Apple of all
companies is selling computers that do not offer a 12 year old standard. If I
had known this, I would not have purchased the iPhone.

4) Bluetooth

Not even Apple can get this perfect it seems. I have multiple pairs of wireless
earbuds and the iPhone seems keen on connecting to as many as it possibly can.
I'll be using one pair, and suddenly the audio will stop and I'll hear a faint
tinny sound coming from somewhere else in my domicile, because iPhone decided
to connect to a different pair of headphones and route the music over there.
It's especially annoying when it happens on a VoIP call.

I expected more from Apple in this department, they clearly pay obsessive
attention to UX, bluetooth issues are oddly out of place.

5) Face ID?

Face ID is cool. It works most of the time. The problem is that it doesn't work
all of the time, and in particular, it works less of the time than the
fingerprint reader on my Pixel 4a did. The fingerprint reader didn't work when
my hands were wet, but other than that, it was much more consistent than Face
ID has been.

6) Price

My iPhone 13 Mini carrier-unlocked from Apple with AppleCare+ cost $1,100. That
is insane.


## Mids

1) Blue bubble

Ok, this is more of an anthropology piece than anything, but it's kind of
interesting to write about anyway.

Many people are very preoccupied with status symbols. Apple has created a
genius status symbol in iMessage. If two iPhone users text each other, Apple
automatically upgrades the conversation to use iMessage, their encrypted
messaging solution. In this case the text bubbles are blue. But if an iPhone
user texts a non-iPhone user, iMessage is unavailable and the connection falls
back to SMS. In this case, the iPhone user sees the messages as green.

Because iPhones are seen as the premium choice of phone among Millenials and
later generations, being a "green bubble" is tantamount to failing a status
symbol check. Youth refer to non-iPhone using youth as "green bubbles". It's
like showing up to home room wearing gap instead of bape. Dumb as it is, some
people retain social aspects of their adolescence into adult life, so having an
iPhone can be social grease when texting such people. I don't condone it but
pretending it isn't real is just being naïve.

## Conclusions

I'm keeping iPhone. Overall it is MUCH more enjoyable to use than flagship
Android devices, and while I have gripes with it, I've solved all of them one
way or another (except for ad-free YouTube). Security is clearly much better.
It's a pleasure to use because of the buttery smooth UX. Filesystem access is
surprisingly good while also maintaining strong application sandboxing. The
camera is by far the best mobile camera I have ever used.

Lack of sideloading sucks and the phone is overpriced.

I wish there was a company that made a good phone.
